

Congressional Record, Volume 140 Issue 101 (Thursday, July 28, 1994)

[Congressional Record Volume 140, Number 101 (Thursday, July 28, 1994)]
[Senate]
[Page S]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Printing Office [www.gpo.gov]


[Congressional Record: July 28, 1994]
From the Congressional Record Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]

 
                IMPROVING AMERICA'S SCHOOLS ACT OF 1994

  The Senate continued with the consideration of the bill.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The pending business is the amendment offered 
by the junior Senator from Illinois [Ms. Moseley-Braun].
  Who seeks recognition?
  Mr. PELL. Mr. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The bill clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order 
for the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.
  Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, I see my friend and colleague, the 
Senator from Illinois, on the floor.
  We had anticipated that we would move ahead with the amendment of 
Senator Moseley-Braun. But just to move the whole process forward I ask 
unanimous consent that it be temporarily set aside, and that we 
consider the amendment of the senior Senator from Illinois.
  Mr. GORTON. Reserving the right to object, may I ask what the status 
is with respect to the amendment of the Senator from Washington?
  Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, as I understand, the Senator's amendment 
is preserved. At any time we can call it back. As I understand it, 
regular order brings back the amendment of the Senator from Washington. 
I had understood that there were continuing negotiations that were 
taking place on the Senator's amendment. We were just attempting to 
expedite.
  Mr. GORTON. The amendment, the basic underlying issue, has been set 
aside for an amendment by Senator Moseley-Braun, and now the Senator 
seeks to set aside that one for a third amendment by the senior Senator 
from Illinois.
  Mr. KENNEDY. The Senator is correct.
  Mr. GORTON. I have no objection.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.
  The Chair recognizes the Senator from Illinois [Mr. Simon].


                           Amendment No. 2423

  (Purpose: To establish the Longer School Year Incentive Act of 1994)

  Mr. SIMON. Mr. President, in behalf of Senator Byrd, Senator Pell, 
Senator Chafee, Senator Kohl, and myself, I send an amendment to the 
desk and ask for its immediate consideration.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report.
  The bill clerk read as follows:

       The Senator from Illinois [Mr. Simon], for himself, Mr. 
     Byrd, Mr. Pell, Mr. Chafee, and Mr. Kohl, proposes an 
     amendment numbered 2423.

  Mr. SIMON. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that reading of the 
amendment be dispensed with.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.
  The amendment is as follows:

       On page 1205, between lines 4 and 5, insert the following:

                      ``PART D--LONGER SCHOOL YEAR

     ``SEC. 13401. SHORT TITLE.

       ``This part may be cited as the `Longer School Year 
     Incentive Act of 1994'.

     ``SEC. 13402. FINDINGS.

       ``The Congress finds as follows:
       ``(1) A competitive world economy requires that students in 
     the United States receive education and training that is at 
     least as rigorous and high-quality as the education and 
     training received by students in competitor countries.
       ``(2) Despite our Nation's transformation from a farm-based 
     economy to one based on manufacturing and services, the 
     school year is still based on the summer needs of an agrarian 
     economy.
       ``(3) For most students in the United States, the school 
     year is 180 days long. In Japan students go to school 243 
     days per year, in Germany students go to school 240 days per 
     year, in Austria students go to school 216 days per year, in 
     Denmark students go to school 200 days per year, and in 
     Switzerland students go to school 195 days per year.
       ``(4) In the final four years of schooling, students in 
     schools in the United States spend a total of 1,460 hours on 
     core academic subjects, less than half of the 3,528 hours so 
     spent in Germany, the 3,280 hours so spent in France, and the 
     3,170 hours so spent in Japan.
       ``(5) American students' lack of formal schooling is not 
     counterbalanced with more homework. The opposite is true, as 
     half of all European students report spending at least two 
     hours on homework per day, compared to only 29 percent of 
     American students. Twenty-two percent of American students 
     watch five or more hours of television per day, while less 
     than eight percent of European students watch that much 
     television.
       ``(6) More than half of teachers surveyed in the United 
     States cite `children who are left on their own after school' 
     as a major problem.
       ``(7) Over the summer months, disadvantaged students not 
     only fail to advance academically, but many forget much of 
     what such students had learned during the previous school 
     year.
       ``(8) Funding constraints as well as the strong pull of 
     tradition have made extending the school year difficult for 
     most States and school districts.
       ``(9) Experiments with extended and multi-track school 
     years have been associated with both increased learning and 
     more efficient use of school facilities.

     ``SEC. 13403. PURPOSE.

       ``It is the purpose of this part to allow the Secretary to 
     provide financial incentives and assistance to States or 
     local educational agencies to enable such States or agencies 
     to substantially increase the amount of time that students 
     spend participating in quality academic programs, and to 
     promote flexibility in school scheduling.

     ``SEC. 13404. PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

       ``The Secretary is authorized to award grants to States or 
     local educational agencies to enable such States or agencies 
     to support public school improvement efforts that include the 
     expansion of time devoted to core academic subjects and the 
     extension of the school year to not less than 210 days.

     ``SEC. 13405. APPLICATION.

       ``Any State or local educational agency desiring assistance 
     under this part shall submit to the Secretary an application 
     at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such 
     information as the Secretary may require.

     ``SEC. 13406. FUND ALLOCATION.

       ``(a) Funding.--Of the funds appropriated pursuant to the 
     authority of section 13501 for each fiscal year, the 
     Secretary may reserve not more than 50 percent of such funds 
     for such year to carry out this part.
       ``(b) Availability.--Funds made available under subsection 
     (a) for any fiscal year shall remain available until 
     expended.
       On page 1193, line 21, insert ``and not used to carry out 
     part D for such year'' after ``year''.
       On page 1194, line 2, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1195, line 17, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1195, line 25, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1198, line 4, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1198, line 7, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1198, line 13, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1198, line 20, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1198, line 24, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1199, line 3, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1199, line 16, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1199, line 18, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1199, line 23, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1200, line 1, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1200, line 15, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1200, line 24, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1201, line 5, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1202, line 20, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1202, line 22, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1203, line 6, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1203, line 18, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1204, line 2, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1204, line 4, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1204, line 10, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1204, line 18, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1204, line 22, insert ``(other than part D)'' after 
     ``title''.
       On page 1205, line 5, strike ``D'' and insert ``E''.
       On page 1205, line 6, strike ``13401'' and insert 
     ``13501''.
  Mr. SIMON. Mr. President, this sets aside up to $100 million of 
discretionary spending under title 13 by the Secretary of Education for 
the purpose of encouraging longer school years. We all know that 
education has to receive a higher priority if we are to do for the 
future what we ought to do for this country. That includes hours in 
school, and it includes days in school.
  For example, today in Japan you go an average of 243 days a year. In 
Germany, you go an average of 240 days a year. We go an average of 180 
days a year. Why do we go 180 days a year? In theory so our children 
can go out and harvest the crops.
  I see my friend from Washington on the floor, my friend from 
Mississippi on the floor, from Massachusetts, and from Rhode Island on 
the floor. The children in those States, and in an agricultural State 
like Illinois, are no more going out and harvesting crops in the 
summertime. I live at Route 1, Makanda, IL, population 402. Even in 
Makanda, IL, they are not going out and harvesting the crops.
  If you look at the hours in school, the average hours of high school 
instruction per year--it is not simply the days, it is the hours we 
spend in school also. In Germany it is 882 hours; France, 820 hours; 
Japan, 792 hours; the United States, 365 hours. Can we learn as much in 
180 days as our friends in Japan do in 243 or in Germany in 240? To ask 
the question is to answer it. We know the answer to that question.
  Title 13 is designed to bring innovation and flexibility. But the 
reality is it has not brought much of any of those things. It has just 
been kind of a largess for school districts. If that is what we want to 
create, we can.
  But it is interesting that a recent study by the Education Department 
said that this could be a powerful vehicle for educational reform if it 
were focused more. The study specifically recommended that local school 
districts ``concentrate chapter 2--it used to be chapter 2, it is now 
called title 13--funds on one specific activity or program relating to 
reform, or an educational priority, in order to maximize the potential 
of funds would make a difference.''
  We have to face up to some reality. Let us just say that the 
Secretary of Education decides to use all $100 million. In the billions 
that we spend in this country, $100 million is not very much money. Let 
us just say the Secretary determines we can pay $30 per student to 
assist schools that go from 180 days to 210. That is the period that we 
are asking for in this amendment that would be increased to. If they do 
it, they could get $30 per student, not a lot of money. It is enough 
money to cause every school board to talk about it; to consider it, and 
a very few schools are moving in that direction now. We need to do 
more. We need to emphasize education much more than we have been.
  Other nations are putting their resources into education as we are 
not. We make great speeches about education on the floor. Every Senator 
is an education Senator. Every President is an education President. 
Every Member of the House is an education House Member. This is a 
chance to really do something, to really improve education in our 
country. My hope is that the amendment will be adopted.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there further debate?
  Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, I am looking for our good friends and 
colleagues to address this issue. I for one personally think that it is 
well worth trying to encourage an extended school year. We have been 
attempting to work out the different provisions of the legislation. We 
have taken the old title II and moved that into a teacher training 
program. And now the amendment comes which will take a very sizable 
amount of resources.
  Can the Senator explain to us? In terms of its relationship, is he 
carving out this amount of money from title 13?
  Mr. SIMON. No. It simply says the Secretary of Education may 
designate up to $100 million. So if the Secretary designates zero 
dollars, there is no violation. If the Secretary designates $10, there 
is no violation. This gives the Secretary some flexibility. But 
obviously it is a signal from Congress to do this.
  Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, with that understanding, I would urge the 
Senate to accept the amendment.
  Mr. PELL. Mr. President, I would like to add a word of support for 
this idea. I know I have felt very strongly about this for years. I 
always carry this agenda book with me, and in here I have some of these 
figures: The Soviet Union has 210 days; Canada, 200; Thailand, 220, and 
on ad infinitum.
  I think it is a wonderful amendment. I would like to see it stronger 
and with more money. But this is about the amount that can be digested. 
It is excellent work.
  Mrs. KASSEBAUM. Mr. President, I apologize to the Senator from 
Illinois and the Senator from Massachusetts. I did not quite 
understand. Did the Senator say there would be no chapter II money that 
would be withdrawn?
  Mr. SIMON. This is the old chapter II. It is title XIII now. What it 
does is, it says up to $100 million may be designated by the Secretary 
of Education for this purpose.
  Mrs. KASSEBAUM. Mr. President, I think all of us are intrigued by, if 
not supporting of, a longer school year. But I also am a strong 
believer that this is a local decision. I think that once we start 
adding money for encouraging a longer school year, we are going to be 
into major policy decisions that I think are best left up to a school 
district and to a State.
  Mr. SIMON. If my colleague will yield. Yes, we are leaving this up to 
the local schools. But what we have found through the years is that 
when we have a little carrot out there to help schools, whether it is 
vocational education or whatever it is, it does help move people in the 
right direction when we see a national need. I do not think anyone can 
dispute the figures Senator Pell just used, and that we are way behind 
other countries in terms of hours and school days.
  So this is a nudge--and I have to confess, a slight nudge --in that 
direction.
  Mrs. KASSEBAUM. Mr. President, I know that Senator Jeffords is on his 
way to the floor. I think he wants to address this issue.
  Mr. KENNEDY. Mr. President, with that understanding, I ask that we 
temporarily set aside this amendment.
  The change in this amendment is rather than having a separate fund, 
that would be designated. For now it is purely permissive and is purely 
discretionary, up to the Secretary. I think we are going to have to 
probably work this through in terms of the conference, in any event. 
This is somewhat different in terms of what was initially proposed. I 
am glad to wait until Senator Jeffords comes here. But it is, as I 
understand it, significantly different than either adding another $100 
million or carving out that amount of money from the programs that were 
in existence. But I am more than glad to wait for the Senator from 
Vermont.
  Mrs. KASSEBAUM. Mr. President, I would like to set this aside until 
he has a chance to comment.
  Mr. GRAMM. Reserving the right to object. I had intended to speak for 
a moment on the crime bill and on health care. Maybe we can hold this 
unanimous consent request until I have spoken. That would give the 
Senator from Vermont an opportunity to come over here and speak. Given 
that I intend to have the floor for about 10 minutes, perhaps it would 
save the Senate's time to simply allow me to speak, and then if Senator 
Jeffords appears, the debate can continue on that amendment.
  Mr. KENNEDY. I am glad to accommodate. The Senator from Illinois has 
another amendment relative to this bill, that he wanted to process. We 
are trying to move this process forward. We only had a limited time 
this morning and, quite appropriately, we took time this afternoon. We 
are now at the hour of 3:15, and we have a number of important 
amendments.
  Obviously, people can, under the Senate rules, speak. We are 
attempting to move this process forward. So we have been trying to ask 
the cooperation of the Members. I certainly cannot preclude any Member 
from speaking.
  We reached the situation last evening at 8 o'clock where the managers 
were here and prepared to deal with serious matters, and we were unable 
to get the Members here to consider these issues.
  This is an enormously important education bill. We have to abide by 
the Senate rules, obviously. I would like to see if we could not make 
further progress. Obviously, the Senator is entitled to speak at any 
time.
  Mr. GRAMM. Well, Mr. President, I would be happy to try to 
accommodate my colleagues. Why do I not try to go ahead and truncate 
what I wanted to say about the crime bill and health care and, in the 
meantime, if somebody wants to call the Senator from Vermont, and he 
were to come over, he could speak. If he did not, certainly I would 
have no objection to a unanimous consent request to set the amendment 
aside.
  Mr. KENNEDY. Well, the Senator is entitled, as matter of right, to 
address the Senate. The Senator from Illinois has another amendment on 
which we can begin at this time, even while we are waiting for the 
Senator from Vermont to get here. The Senator can gain recognition and 
speak. We are hopeful of trying to accommodate the leadership on both 
sides. This was a bill that had a 16-1 approval rating. It is 
enormously important legislation, and Members can speak on it.
  The manager would prefer that we deal with the amendments that are 
relevant. But any Member is entitled to address the Senate on any other 
measure.
  Mrs. KASSEBAUM. I wonder if the Senator from Texas will yield a 
moment for a parliamentary inquiry?
  Mr. GRAMM. I yield the floor temporarily.
  Mrs. KASSEBAUM. What is the standing of Senator Moseley-Braun's 
amendment?
  Mr. KENNEDY. That has been temporarily set aside. I know the Senator 
wanted to address that issue. I, of course, would like to resolve that 
issue as well.
  Mr. GRAMM. Mr. President, if I might reclaim my time, I would have 
already spoken and left.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator is correct.

                          ____________________



