

Congressional Record, Volume 140 Issue 19 (Monday, February 28, 1994)

[Congressional Record Volume 140, Number 19 (Monday, February 28, 1994)]
[Senate]
[Page S]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Printing Office [www.gpo.gov]


[Congressional Record: February 28, 1994]
From the Congressional Record Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]

 
                         ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS

                                 ______


        1995 SPECIAL OLYMPICS WORLD GAMES COMMEMORATIVE COIN ACT

 Mr. DURENBERGER. Mr. President, it is an honor for me to join 
with my distinguished colleague from Connecticut, Senator Dodd, as an 
original cosponsor of S. 1860, the 1995 Special Olympics World Games 
Commemorative Coin Act.
  As we have proudly watched our athletes represent the United States 
in Lillehammer, I am reminded of another group of special individuals 
who give their utmost not only in the athletic arena, but in their 
daily lives. Three years ago this summer, Minnesota hosted over 6,000 
athletes from around the world as they competed in the International 
Special Olympics. These games were the largest sporting event in the 
world in 1991--and the largest international multisport event ever held 
in Minnesota. I, along with members of my staff, appreciated the 
opportunity to admire these world-class competitors as they exhibited 
courage, fortitude, and a sincere desire to be the best.
  These games play a vital role in the continued development of public 
awareness of the potential and capabilities of people with handicaps. 
The support which these athletes receive from their coaches, families, 
friends, and volunteers is returned many times over by the outstanding 
human spirit displayed by these special competitors.
   Mr. President, I hope my colleagues will join me in support of S. 
1860 as we recognize the achievements of some truly admirable 
individuals who have taught us so much.

                          ____________________



